







MAILER was developed at the University Computing Center, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, by Kevin Jordan, John Curran, Peter Krotkov, and
Ken Shores. The manual was written by Pat Driscoll.

The UCC wishes to thank Jim Day of  Florida State University for
converting the original version of this manual for use on the Apple
Macintosh* and Jim Lyons, also of FSU, for the cover picture.
  
Mailer Quick Reference Chart

Here  is a brief description of each command with a reference to the pages 
in  the  manual  where a more indepth description can be found.   Commands
may  be  abbreviated  to  their  shortest unique form (the upper case
letters  in  each  command).

Command Description Page

MAIL - Enter Mailer. 9
Bye, Exit, Quit - Exit from Mailer to the operating system.    9
COunt - Issue count of messages in the current notesfile. 11
CReate - Create a public notesfile, group, or alias. 17
Delete - Delete message(s) from the current notesfile. 13
FInd - Find names and notesfiles by template. 25
FOrward - Forward message(s) to another user. 15
Help - List the general help topics. 3
List - List information on the message(s) in a notesfile. 12
Print - Send message(s) to a printer. 14
REAd - Change the notesfile to be read. 10
REMove - Remove a public notesfile, group, or alias. 19
REName - Rename a notesfile, group or alias. 19
REPly - Reply to the last message read or a list of messages. 15
SAve - Store message(s) in a file. 13
SENd - Send a message to another user, or users. 20
SET - Set Alias, Abbreviation, Forwarding, or Verbosity. 26
SHow - Show the current values for the SET options. 28
SYstem - Execute a NOS system command from within Mailer. 34
Transmit - Send a messaage (contained in a file)  24
Update - Read all new messages in a list of notesfiles. 11
[FILENAME] - Read commands from a file 32
_________________________________________________________

You can simply type a command,  press RETURN and be prompted for
parameters if the command requires them.   Primarily,  parameters fall
into two  categories,  range or name.

NAME In  general,   name  is  either  a  notesfile,  list  of  notesfiles
(separated  by commas),  file name (surrounded by brackets) or   registered
group that  you wish to send mail to.   A username can be used as long  as
the username is preceeded by a "=" sign.  (e.g., =aqzy000).  Name can also be
any combination of the above separated by commas.

RANGE If Mailer is looking for a range it expects either 

  Number(s)  - a single number or range separated by a "-"
     ex. 1 (message 1)
     5-10 (messages 5-10)
     10-5 (messages 10-5    reverse order)
     3- (messages 3-last)
     -10 (messages 1-10)
  
 or one of the following keywords:

  New - any messages that have not yet been updated.
  Old - any messages that have already been updated. 
  All - all the messages in a notesfile.
  Last  - the highest numbered message.

REMEMBER You  can type a ? in response to any prompt in Mailer  and
receive help with what Mailer is expecting for a response.

INTRODUCTION

Due to  the growing use of computers as a means of communication, the 
University Computing Center has recognized the need for an  UCC supported
and administered electronic mail system.  With the release of Version
4.01, Mailer was chosen as the official mail system for the UCC computer
system.

Mailer is an easy to use interactive mail program.  In its barest form it
allows you to exchange mail with any other user of the Mailer system.
Once you register with Mailer a private notesfile is created for you from
which you can enter, edit, and send a letter to another user.  You can also
read and reply to mail that has been sent to you.  Help with Mailer can be
obtained at any time simply by typing a ? (question mark) in response to
any of the prompts from Mailer.

Using Mailer's more advanced options you can forward mail, create groups
so mail can be sent to more than one person at a time, create and maintain
a public notesfile that users may send mail to, and send mail to users on
other computers that are linked to the CYBER.  Through Mailer you can also
register with the BITNET network to send mail to users at other sites
around the country and the world.

Users should be aware that as with any mail system they are responsible
for the contents of the mail that they send.  Even though the use of aliases
is allowed it is always possible for the Mailer Manager to trace the origin
of any letter.  Your username will be printed along with your mailer name
in the "from" section of any letter you send.   Mailer also logs messages in
both the user and system dayfiles to aid in the authentication of message
origins.  Messages are logged when mail is sent or when a user changes his
 Mailer name.   Remember the use of Mailer, and the UCC computers for that
matter, is not a right, but a privilege that can be revoked if misused.

This manual is meant to be used as both a tutorial for the first time user
and a reference for those old hands at using Mailer.

As always, in the never ending effort to improve our services, we are open
for suggestions.   If  you have any comments (we accept praise too) about
the Mailer system, please feel free to send them (via Mailer) to "Mailer 
Manager".

Table of Contents

I. General Information   2
  Mailer Names  2
           Notesfiles  2
  Notification of Mail Delivery -- Silence Command  2
  Help  3
  Mailer Command Syntax  3

II. A No Frills Session For The New User   5

III. Using Mailer   9
  Accessing and Leaving Mailer  9
   Mail 9
   Exit, Quit or Bye 9
  Reading Mail  10
   Read 10
   Update 11
   Count 11
   List  12
  What You Can Do With Mail After Reading It  13
   Delete 13
   Save 13
   Print 14
   Forward 15
   Reply  15
  Public Notesfiles, Groups and Aliases  17
   Create 17
   Rename 19
   Remove 19
  Creating, Editing and Sending a Letter  20
   Send 20
   Sending a Message with Options 21
   Resending a Message 22
   Editing 22
  Sending  A Previously Created File As Mail  24
   Transmit 24
  Finding A Mailer Name, Alias, or Public Notesfile  25
   Find 25
  Setting Alias, Forwarding, Verbosity, or Abbreviation  26
   Set 26
   Show 28

IV. Examples of  Files that Mailer Uses       29
  Creating an ASCII File for a Group  29
  Creating a Login Procedure  30
  Creating a Mail Prolog  30
  Creating a Command File  31
  
V. Advanced Features   33
   Entering Mailer with Special Switches --MAILER/V,P,I,C  33
   Managing a Notesfile -- MAIL,MANAGE  33
   Initiating NOS System Commands From Within Mailer   34
   Uploading Messages Created on a Micro  into Mailer  34
   Customizing the  Mailer .Proc Command  34
   Customizing the Mailer Print Command  35
   Customizing the Mailer .Edit Command   36
   Changing Permissions on a Notesfile  36
   Sending Mail to Someone on a Different Computer
   or at Another Site 38

VI. Error Messages     45

I.  General Things You Need to Know

Mailer is an interactive program.  If a command is expecting some options
and you have not given them, Mailer will prompt you for them.  If you have
given a command and then decide you didn't really want to give that
command, you can usually get back to the main prompt by simply pressing
RETURN when Mailer prompts you for an option.  Discussed here are some
important features and concepts that you should be aware of when using
Mailer.  All of the examples of what you need to type are in italics.

Mailer Names

In Mailer you are identified by a name.  The first time you enter Mailer you
are asked to choose this name.  After that, you will be known by that name
every time you access Mailer.  All names in Mailer  can be up to eighty
characters long, although we recommend that you keep them less than
twenty if you want to send or receive mail over the network (to and from
other computers).  A name should only contain letters, numbers, and
blanks, but the following characters are valid: A-Z, a-z, 0-9, blank (" "),
period ("."), minus ("-"), underscore ("_"), ampersand ("&"), dollar sign ("$"),
and apostrophe (" ' ").  Your Mailer name can be changed at any time by
using the "RENAME" command.  It is also possible to create aliases for
yourself that others can use when sending you mail.  This is done using the
"CREATE alias" command.  If you wish to use one of these aliases when
sending mail use the "SET alias" command.

We recommend that either your Mailer name or one of your aliases be some
form of your real name (e.g.  "Bob Jones" or "B. Jones") so that others may
more easily find your Mailer name when they want to send you mail.

Notesfiles

The files that Mailer uses to store messages are called notesfiles.  There
are two types of notesfiles, private and public.

Mailer creates a private notesfile for every user who accesses Mailer. 
This private notesfile will have the same name as the user's Mailer name.  
Each time a user signs on to Mailer he is put into his own private notesfile
unless he has set up a prolog (see discussion of Mail Prolog in Section IV)
that does otherwise.  This notesfile is stored on the user's account in a
permanent file.  Unless the user has altered the permissions on this file
(done with the NOS PERMIT and CHANGE commands -- see Section V of this
manual) only he can read mail from this file.  The name of the file that
this private notesfile is stored in is called MAILBOX.  Do not delete this
file.

Public notesfiles can be created by anyone wishing to create one.  These
files also reside on the accounts of the people creating them, but anyone
can send to and read mail from these notesfiles.  The names of these files
will appear in your catalog under the name you specified in the CREATE
command or as the first seven characters of the notesfile name if you did
not specify a filename.  Do not delete these files from your catalog.

Notification of Mail Delivery -- Silence Command

If you receive mail while you are signed on to a terminal a message will
immediately be printed at your terminal notifying you of this fact.  Some
users -- especially graphics users -- might not want to take advantage of
this feature.  If you do not want to be notified of incoming mail use the
SILENCE command when signing on.  Type 

 silence,on
or
 silence,on,quiet

Use the second form if you wish to also suppress the confirmation
message.  This can be especially useful  in setting up procedure files.   If
you are going to use this command each time you sign on you might want to
put it in a login procedure (see Section IV -- Creating a Login Procedure).

Help

There are two different means of obtaining help with Mailer.  Help with
Mailer commands is available anywhere in Mailer simply by typing a ? and
pressing RETURN in  response  to any Mailer prompt.  Mailer will give you a
short description of what you may type at this point and then prompt you
again.

There is also a HELP command in Mailer that will offer information on
general topics.  To use this command simply type HELP   and  the name of
the topic   then press RETURN.  A list of the topics  can be obtained by
typing

 help  index

and  pressing RETURN.,

Mailer Command Syntax

Users may, if they wish, abbreviate Mailer commands to the shortest
unique sequence.  For example, DELETE can be abbreviated to D and COUNT
can be abbreviated to CO.

Mailer commands consist of two parts, commands and parameters.  There
are different ways of initiating a command.  Since Mailer is interactive, 
the most common way is to type a command by itself and press RETURN.  If
Mailer is expecting anything else it will prompt you for the information. 
If you already know the parameter you may type it on the same line as the
command.  If there are certain commands that you always do in sequence
you may want to put those commands in a command file.  You can then
initiate the command file simply by typing the name of the file surrounded
by brackets and pressing RETURN.  For information on creating a command
file see Section IV of  this manual.

Primarily, the parameters in Mailer fall into two categories, range or
name.

 NAME

In general, name can be a single notesfile name.  For example:

 Mailer News

is the name of public notesfile that contains general news items about
Mailer.  Name can also be a list of notesfile names (separated by commas), 

 S. Morse,B. Franklin

or the name of a local or permanent filename (surrounded by brackets).
This file is a previously created ASCII file that contains anything that is
legal for a name (notesfile  names,  groups, filenames, user names)
separated by commas.  For example suppose the above Mailer names were
entered into an ASCII file called "Friends".  You could then specify the
following for name

 [Friends]

Name can also be the name of a registered  group.  The   registered group
name  references a file containing Mailer names, that has been registered
as a group with the "CREATE GROUP" command.  If the name has been
registered as a group then you do not have to put brackets around the name. 

A username can be used as a name as long as the username is preceeded by
a "=" sign.  For example:

 =aqzy000

Also, name can be any combination of these separated by commas.  For
example

 Mailer News,[Friends],=aqzy000
  
 RANGE

If Mailer is looking for a range it expects either

 Number(s) - a single number or range separated by a "-".  For example: 
  
   1 (message 1)
   5-10 (messages 5-10)
   10-5       (messages 10-5,  reverse order) 
   3- (messages 3-last)
   -10 (messages 1-10)

or one of the following keywords:

 New - any messages that have not yet been updated.
 Old - any messages that have already been updated.  
 All - all the messages in a notesfile. 
 Last - the highest numbered message.

If a command is expecting any other sort of parameter, it will be explained
under the command name in Section III of this manual.

REMEMBER - If you need help with a command or parameter you can type a ?
in response to any Mailer prompt and receive information on what Mailer
expects at that point.

It is also possible to string Mailer commands together using semicolons
between the commands.  For example:

  delete 4;read mailer news

will delete message number 4 from your private notesfile and then
establish the public notesfile "Mailer News" as the notesfile you will be
reading.  You should be aware though that if you string commands together
and Mailer encounters an error in one of the commands, the remainder of
the commands on that line will be ignored.  In some cases this can be very
useful.  For example suppose you typed

  read mailer news;list

and the read failed.  If Mailer did not ignore the rest of the line, you would
get a listing of the wrong notesfile.

II.  A No Frills Session for the New User

This brief session with Mailer is merely intended to get your feet wet. 
You will register with Mailer and be shown the simplest way to send and
read a message, get rid of it if you don't want to keep it around and then
leave Mailer.  All of the examples are in italics; remember to press the
RETURN key after every command that you type in. 

Entering Mailer

If this is your first time on the CYBER you may want to obtain  Handout 43:
Logging On and Off the System, that is available in the UCC Consulting
Office (A119, LGRES).  Once you have successfully logged on to the CYBER
with your username, password and charge (if necessary) you can enter
Mailer by typing 

 mail

and pressing RETURN.

Mailer responds with the message

  Welcome to Mailer (version 4.03)

 Please enter the name you'd like to be known as:

 Name>

You are being prompted for the name you wish to be known as on Mailer.  If
you type a ? at this point and press RETURN, you will receive information
on what a name can be and then be prompted for the name again.  Though a
name can be up to 80 characters in length, it is advisable to keep it less
than 20 characters.  We hope you will share our philosophy that this is a
professional mail system, and choose your real name or a variation of your
name.  This will make it easier for others to find your Mailer name when
they are trying to send you mail.  For example, suppose a person named
Benjamin Franklin was choosing his Mailer name.  It could be one of the
following:

 Benjamin Franklin
 Ben Franklin
 B. Franklin 

Of course the choice is up to you.  Any combination of letters (upper and
lower), numbers, blanks ("J"), apostrophes(" ' "), periods ("."), minus signs
("-"), underscores ("_"), or ampersands ("&") may be used.  The only
restriction is that you may not have any leading or trailing blanks and that
the name must also be unique.  If you choose a name that is already in use
you will be given a message to that effect and prompted for another name.
For this example suppose Franklin chose B.JFranklin as his Mailer name.
He would have typed in the following in response to "Name>" and pressed
RETURN. 

 Name> B. Franklin

Assuming that Mailer does not already have a B. Franklin registered, Mailer
would respond with:

 Your name has been registered as "B. Franklin"  
  
 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

Franklin is now registered with Mailer and is in his own private notesfile
called B. Franklin.  From now on any time Franklin enters Mailer he will
initially be put into his own private notesfile.

To summarize, in response to "Name>" you can type in the name you wish to
be known by and press RETURN.  Remember if you choose a name that is
already in use, you will be prompted to enter another name.  Once you have
registered successfully you will receive a message similar to the one
above except your notesfile name will be substituted.

You are now in your own private notesfile.  If you type a ? here and press
RETURN, Mailer will display a list of its commands with a brief
description of each.  You probably don't have any mail to read yet but you
can send mail to someone. 

Sending a Message  

To send a message to someone type "send" and press RETURN.  Suppose for
this example Franklin wanted to send a message to S. Morse. 

 "B. Franklin"> send

Mailer would respond with:

 Please enter the destination for the mail:
 To> 

Here you would enter the name you wish to send mail to.  This can be
anything that is legal for a name in Mailer.  It could be a single name, list
of names separated by commas, registered group name, filename
(surrounded by brackets), a public notesfile name, or a username prefixed
with an = sign.  It can also be any combination of these separated by
commas.  For this example Franklin is sending to S. Morse. 

 To> S. Morse

Mailer would respond with:

 Please enter the subject for this message:
 Subject>

It is not mandatory to enter a subject.  You could simply press RETURN
here if you wish and not have a subject.  For this example the message will
have a subject. 

 Subject> Effects of Kite Flying

Mailer would respond with:

 Please enter the message below: (.done to finish)
 ]

At this point Franklin types in his message pressing RETURN after each
line, or he can type a ? and press RETURN and Mailer will list the
commands he can use while creating his message and prompt for the
message again.  Also the message can be edited by typing .EDIT on a line by
itself and pressing RETURN.  This puts you into the system editor allowing
you to edit the message.  (see Section III  -- Editing a Message.) For this
example suppose the following message was typed in with no mistakes. 

 ] You are not going to believe the soothing 
 ] effect I have found that kite flying has on the
 ] nerves.  You must try it.
 ] .done

The ".done" on a line by itself signifies that the message is finished.  After
Franklin has typed the .done and pressed RETURN, Mailer would respond
with:

 Your message has been sent to "S. Morse". 

or
  
 Your message has been sent to "S. Morse" who has been informed. 

The second message would appear if S. Morse had been signed on to a
terminal at the time and had not turned on the SILENCE command (see page
2).

Reading a Message  

There are many different ways to read mail.  For this first session only
the easiest is shown.  Suppose user Franklin wanted to see if he had any
new mail.  The UPDATE command automatically displays any new mail that
has been received since the last time an update was done. 

 "B. Franklin"> update

 Update of notesfile "B. Franklin":

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Message number: 1 
 Message-ID: <860211093918.000001BF.AGCC. MA@UMass>  (UMass-Mailer
4.03)
 Date:  Tue, 19 Aug 86 14:18:53 EDT
 From: S. Morse (=ABBR793)
 Subject: In Reference To Kites
 To: B. Franklin

  I am very interested in your findings.
 Please send more information.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1

He could also have read the message by typing the number of the messege
he wanted to read, in this case a 1, in response to "B. Franklin>". 

Deleting Mail

Messages received will accumulate in a notesfile until they are deleted.
The DELETE command can be used to remove messages from a notesfile. 
You simply type DELETE and the number of the message you wish to delete. 
For example, suppose Franklin wanted to get rid of the message above.  In
response to

 "B. Franklin">

he could have typed: 

 delete 1

and pressed RETURN.  Mailer would respond with

 Message 1 has been deleted.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

Leaving Mailer

Once you have finished with Mailer you can get out of Mailer and back to
the operating system by typing either quit, exit or bye.  They all do the
same thing.  For this example Franklin will use quit.

 "B. Franklin"> quit
 /

III.  Using Mailer 


Accessing and Leaving Mailer


Accessing Mailer

Once you have successfully logged on to the UCC CYBER system and entered
the batch subsystem, you can access Mailer by typing either of the
following two commands:

 mail

or

 mail,count

If you just type "mail" and press RETURN Mailer will be called up.  You
would do this the first time you use Mailer and you may use it any other
time you use Mailer too.  Typing "mail,count" will tell you how many
private messages you currently have but not put you into Mailer.  This can
be placed into a procedure file so that you get a count of your mail
automatically each time you log on to the CYBER (see Section IV --
Creating a Login Procedure).

There is an additional way to enter Mailer using the MAILER command that
more advanced users may wish to use.  This command can be used to
access Mailer, issue the commands you want, and leave Mailer all on one
line.  See Section V -- Entering Mailer with Special Switches. 


Leaving Mailer

We have put the commands for leaving Mailer early in this section in case
you want to exit Mailer without trying any of the commands at this point. 
There are three commands that allow you to leave MAILER.  The choice of
which to use is up to you.  All three exit MAILER and return you to the
operating system so that you can continue doing something else on the
computer, if you wish.  The three commands are: 
  
 exit quit bye 

Simply choose one of these and type it in, in response to the Mailer prompt.

Mailer will also allow you to add a parameter to these commands  if you
wish.  Any text  after  the bye, exit, or quit command will be passed on to
the system as a system command.  For example

 bye  catlist

will exit Mailer and execute a "Catlist" command.  Or,

 bye  bye

will exit Mailer and also log you off the system.


Reading Mail


When you enter Mailer your private notesfile is initially established as the
notesfile you are reading.  You do not have to use the READ command to
read your private mail.  You can use the UPDATE command or you can
simply specify one of the values for range (number(s), all, new, old, last)
to read mail in this notesfile.  You can also press the RETURN key to print
the first unread message.  For example suppose B. Franklin wishes to read
all the mail in his notesfile.

 "B. Franklin"> all

Specifying "all" in response to the prompt will display all of his mail.  If
he wished to read only message number 3, specifying "3" in response to the
prompt will print message number 3. 

 "B. Franklin"> 3

You can also use any of the commands listed below to change to a different
notesfile, read new mail, or find out information about the notesfile you
are in.


READ
READ name

The READ command need only be used if you wish to change notesfiles.  You
can only access another notesfile if it is a public notesfile or it has been
permitted to you in READ, WRITE, or MODIFY mode (done with the NOS
PERMIT or CHANGE commands -- see Section V).  Also, only one notesfile
name can be specified for name.  For example suppose Franklin wants to
read the public notesfile "Mailer News".  

 "B. Franklin"> read Mailer News

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Mailer News">

Notice how the prompt has changed.  Franklin is now reading the public
notesfile Mailer News.  This new notesfile then becomes the current
notesfile until you switch notesfiles again or leave Mailer.  Franklin can
now use either a range or any of the other commands listed here to read
the messages in Mailer News.

If you just specify READ without a name you will be prompted for the
notesfile name you wish to switch to. 

If you have switched notesfiles and wish to switch back to your private
notesfile use the READ command with your Mailer name.  For example,
continuing with the above example, suppose Franklin after reading Mailer
News wishes to switch back to his private notesfile:

 "Mailer News"> read B. Franklin

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">
UPDATE
UPDATE name, name, name, ...

The UPDATE command will print all the new mail you have received, in the
notesfile you are currently in, since the last time you used the UPDATE
command. 

UPDATE and notesfile names separated by commas will read all the new
mail in the notesfiles you specify, but keep you in the notesfile you were
initially in when you did the UPDATE. 
  
UPDATE used with a filename (surrounded by brackets) will look in your
list of local files and your permanent file catalog for the filename
specified.  An update will then be done on the notesfile names specified in
that file.

In this example, Franklin is getting an update of his private notesfile.  He
has only one new message and it is the fifth message in his file.

 "B. Franklin"> update

 Update of notesfile "B. Franklin": 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Message number: 5
 MessageID:<860211093918.00001BF.AGCC.MA@UMass>(UMass-Mailer4.03)
 Date: Tue, 19 Aug 86 14:18:53 EDT
 From: S. Morse (=ABBR793)
 Subject: In Reference To Kites
 To: B. Franklin

 I am very interested in your findings.
 Please send more information.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 5


COUNT
COUNT name, name, name, ...

The COUNT command allows you to find out how many letters are in the
notesfiles specified.  For example if Franklin wanted a count of his private
notesfile.

 "B. Franklin"> count 
 "B. Franklin": 4 messages. 

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

COUNT with a notesfile name will give you a count on the specified
notesfile.  For example, if Franklin wants to obtain a count of the mail in
the public "Mailer News" file. 

 "B. Franklin"> count Mailer News 
 "Mailer News": 72 messages. 

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">
LIST
LIST range

The LIST command, without a range, will give information including
message number, date sent, from whom, and subjects of any messages that
are in the current notesfile.  An asterisk (*) will appear next to the last
message read (the message the REPLY command would use).  The word
"new" will appear next to any unread messages.  For example, 

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> list 

 Listing of the notesfile "B. Franklin":
 -------------------------------------------
  
 1   |  Mon,  1   Aug  86  |  John Doe    |  Here's that information 
 2   |  Wed,  3  Aug  86  |   Mom |     How have you been?  
 * 3   |  Tue,  16  Aug  86  |   Coach  |  Exercise schedule
 New 4   |  Mon,  22  Aug  86   |   Narrator  |  Theme for your new story

LIST used with a range will list the same information but only for the
messages specified by the range.  For example the command

 list new

will list information about all messages not yet read.
What You Can Do With Mail After Reading It


DELETE
DELETE range

The 'Delete' command will delete a message or messages from the current
notesfile if the notesfile is either your private notesfile or a public
notesfile that you have created or to which you have been granted write
permission.  If you specify the delete command without a range then you
will be prompted for the range you wish to delete.  

When you delete a message, all the messages with numbers greater than
that message are instantly renumbered.  Make sure to delete in descending
order (from higher to lower) if you are going to delete more than one
message at a time.

Here is an example of a delete, deleting the 2nd and 3rd messages of 4
messages.  Notice how in the second listing of the notesfile, the 4th
message has become the 2nd.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> list 

 Listing of the notesfile "B. Franklin":
 -------------------------------------------
  
 1   |  Mon,  1   Aug  86  |  John Doe    |  Here's that information 
 2   |  Wed,  3  Aug  86  |   Mom |     How have you been?  
  3   |  Tue,  16  Aug  86  |   Coach  |  Exercise schedule
 * 4   |  Mon,  22  Aug  86   |   Narrator  |  Theme for your new story

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> delete 3;delete 2
 Letter number 3 deleted. 
 Letter number 2 deleted.
  
 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> list 

 Listing of the notesfile "B. Franklin":
 -------------------------------------------

 1   |  Mon,  1   Aug  86  |  John Doe    |  Here's that information 
 * 2   |  Mon,  22  Aug  86   |   Narrator  |  Theme for your new story
  

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

The only time you don't have to delete in descending order is when you are
deleting letters in a range.  For instance, in the above example, you could
have typed "Delete 2-3".  If you type "Delete -", all of your letters will be
deleted. 


SAVE
SAVE range filename

The SAVE command saves, in a permanent file, the message or messages
specified by a range.  If you do not specify the range you will be prompted
for it.  You will also be prompted for the filename of the file you wish the
message(s) stored in.  If this file already exists the message(s) will be
appended to the file.  For example

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> save 1-3 Augmail
 Messages 1-3 have been saved in file "AUGMAIL".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

 In the above example Franklin saves messages 1, 2 and 3 from his private
notesfile in a file called AUGMAIL.  A message is displayed showing that
the save was successful.  An error message would have been issued if the
save was unsuccessful.


PRINT 
PRINT range printer 

The PRINT command is used to send a copy of the specified messages to a
printer.  This command uses the NOS PRINT command.  Any printer that can
be used with the NOS PRINT command is valid.  It is possible for a user to
customize this command (see Section V of this manual).

If you do not specify the range of messages you want printed you will be
prompted for them.

You will not be prompted for a printer.  If you do not specify a printer the
messages will be printed on the  ASCII  printer.  Valid options for printer
include:

 ASCII Computer room, Lederle GRES
 GRC1 A118, Lederle GRES
 GTWR2 Lederle GDTWR 220
 LIBRARY Tower Library, 7th floor
 ELAB ELAB
 CHEME Chemical Engineering
 MATH Lederle GDTWR 1535
  
You may also specify optional printing parameters.  Most parameters
supported by the NOS  PRINT command are allowed.

In this example, Franklin is sending all the messages in his notesfile to be
printed on the printer in  room A118, called GRC1.
  
 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> print all  grc1
 File: Zzzmprt, Printer:Grc1, Jsn:ADSM, Hash:GL2Q
 A copy of your ascii file has been queued for printing on
 long, wide paper.
 It will be shifted.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

The listing of the messages would be picked up in room A118 Lederle GRES
by the identifying hash code (in this case GL2Q).
In the following example, Franklin is sending multiple copies of all his
messages to the  ASCII line printer, specifying that the listing will be
thicker  than an inch and specifying a  job name.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> print all  ascii  copies=3,thick,ujn=mail


FORWARD 
FORWARD range name,name,name...
FORWARD range name,name,(name):option

You may wish to forward a copy of a message you received to another
Mailer user or group.  The FORWARD command can do this.  If you simply
type FORWARD and press RETURN you will be prompted for the range of
messages you wish to forward, the name or names you wish the mail
forwarded to and a  subject.  You can specify anything for name that is
valid for the name  parameter.  You can leave the subject blank if you wish.

In this example Franklin is forwarding a copy of message 1 from his
private notesfile to Mailer user "S. Morse". 

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> forward 1 S. Morse
 Please  enter the subject for this message: 
 Subject> For your information

 Your message has been sent to "S. Morse".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

When you are forwarding the same message to more than one person Mailer
allows different options to be set for  each name or group if desired.  For a
list of these options and how to use them see  the section in this manual
on the SEND command.


REPLY 
REPLY range

The REPLY command allows you to reply to a message or messages you
have received.  It is similar to the SEND command only there is no need to
give a destination for the message.  Mailer will fill that in for you.  If you
do not give a range with the command, Mailer will assume you wish to
reply to the last message that you read.  You will not be prompted for a
range.  If you wish to reply to something other than the last message read
or more than one message, you must give a range with the command.  A
reply to a range will prompt separately for each message.

When you  are replying to a message that message is loaded into a local
file called ZZREPLY.  This can be helpful if you wish  to  edit the original
message or read the original message into the reply for commenting
purposes.  If you are using FSE you  can view both the message and your
reply at the same time by splitting the screen.

Replying can become confusing if you are replying to a message that has
been forwarded to you, or if you are replying to a reply.  If you are replying
to a forwarded message, the reply will be addressed to the person who
originally sent the message not the person that forwarded the message.  In
the case of replying to a reply, check the header of the message.  If there
is a "Resent-reply-to:" field your reply will be sent to the address in this
field.  If this field is not present, the "Reply- to:" field will be checked and
if present used as the address.  If neither of these is present the address
in the "From": field will be used.

If you need directions on editing the reply, see "Editing a Message", in this
manual.

In this example Franklin is sending a reply to message 2 from Narrator.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> reply 2

 Replying to message number 2 whose subject is "Theme for your new
story".
 Reply is addressed to "Narrator (=ABBR408)".

 Please enter the subject for this reply.
 Subject> Deadline for Theme

 Please enter the message below: (.done to finish)
 ] Dear Narrator:
 ]
 ] I will be unable to meet the deadline for my
 ] new theme.  Is an extension possible?
 ]
 ]     Thanks, Franklin
 ] .done

 Your message has been sent to "Narrator".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

Note that blank lines may be included in your message text.  Blank lines do
not terminate message input.
Public Notesfiles, Groups and Aliases


CREATE

The CREATE command allows you to create a public notesfile that other
users can read and send mail to, or aliases for your Mailer name that users
can use when sending you mail.  It also allows you to register a file
containing Mailer names as a valid group that users can send mail to.

If you enter the CREATE command by itself you will be prompted for the
type of object you wish to create.  The valid objects are:

 PUBLIC --  A public notesfile.
 ALIAS --  An alternative name for your private notesfile.
 GROUP --  A registered list of names.

CREATE PUBLIC
CREATE PUBLIC name:filename

This command allows you to create a public notesfile which other Mailer
users can read and send mail to.  You can create as many public notesfiles
as you wish.  Remember that these files will reside on your account and
that you will be identified as the owner of the notesfile in the Mailer
database.  The name of the public notesfile must conform to the rules for a
Mailer name.  If there is already a notesfile by the name you are trying to
use, you will be informed.  If you do not specify a filename (1-7
alphanumeric characters) for the messages to be stored in, the first seven
characters of the notesfile name will be used.  In this example Franklin is
creating a public notesfile called "Weather Information" and specified the
filename for the notesfile to be "winfo".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> create public

 Please enter the name of the public notesfile to be created:  
 Name> Weather Information:winfo

 The public notesfile "Weather Information" has been created.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

Once you have created a public notesfile you are considered the owner of
the notesfile and are allowed to use the name of the public notesfile as an
alias.

CREATE ALIAS

You may wish to create aliases for your Mailer name that users can use
when sending you mail.  You can have as many aliases as you wish.
Remember that aliases do not make you anonymous.  In the Mailer database
the owner  of each alias is identified.  In this example Franklin creates the
alias "Weatherman" for himself.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> create alias

 Please enter the name of the alias to be created:
 Name> Weatherman

           The alias "Weatherman"  has been created.


CREATE GROUP
CREATE GROUP name:filename:recordname

The CREATE GROUP command can be used to register a file containing a list
of Mailer names as a group.  Anyone that this file is then permitted to
(using the NOS PERMIT command -- see Section V), can send to the group as
a whole, instead of having to send the letter to each member of the group
individually.

You should be aware that the CREATE GROUP command does not actually
create the file containing the Mailer names, it just registers the name of
the group in the Mailer database.  You must create the actual ASCII file
containing the Mailer names that you want in the group. 

When specifying the group name it must follow the conventions for a
Mailer name.  You should also specify the filename of the ASCII file
containing the Mailer names in the group and because there can be more
than one group of names in the file, a record name within that file to
identify the group.  If you do not specify the ASCII filename, Mailer will
assume that the filename is the same as the first seven characters of the
group name.  If you do not specify a record name within the file, for the
group, Mailer will assume that the record name is the same as the first
seven characters of the group name.

In this example Franklin is registering a group called "Flying Friends"
whose names are stored in a file called "mgroups" under the record name
"flying".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> create group
  
 Please enter the name of the group to be created:
 Name> Flying Friends:mgroups:flying

 The group "Flying Friends" has been created.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

Now anytime Franklin sends mail to "Flying Friends", Mailer will go look
for the file "mgroups" in his permanent file catalog and send to the Mailer
names listed in that file under the record name "flying".

Remember to create the ASCII file containing the Mailer names in the
group.  An ASCII file is an upper/lower case file.  It can be created using
XEDIT or FSE.

When creating the ASCII file the first line must be upper case and must be
the record name of the group.  If there is more than one group in the file
there must be an EOR (End-of-Record) separating each group from the next. 
See Section IV of this manual for examples of the structure of the ASCII
file.

Once you have created the ASCII file it is stored as a private file on your
account.  You must permit this file to whomever you want to be able to use
it.  This is done with the NOS PERMIT command (see Section V of this
manual).


RENAME
RENAME name,newname

You can use the RENAME command to rename anything that you have
created.  This can be a notesfile (private or public), alias or group that you
have registered.  If you specify the RENAME command by itself you will be
prompted for both the name of the object you wish to rename and its new
name.  If you specify the name and new name along with the command you
must separate the two with a comma.  In this example Franklin is
renaming the public notesfile he created called "Weather Information" to
"The Weather".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> rename Weather Information,The Weather 

 "Weather Information" has been renamed "The Weather".


REMOVE
REMOVE name

If you wish to remove a public notesfile, alias, or group that you created
use the REMOVE command followed by the name of the notesfile, alias or
group you wish to remove.  Only one name can be specified at a time. 
Please note this will remove the notesfile name, alias, or group name from
the Mailer database but you will have to delete the file for the notesfile or
group from your account yourself.  If you do not specify the name you wish
removed you will be prompted for it.

In this example Franklin is removing the alias "Weatherman" that he
created for himself from the database.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> remove

 Please enter the name you wish to remove.
 Name> Weatherman

 "Weatherman" has been removed.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">
Creating, Editing, and Sending a Letter


SEND
SEND name,name,name,...
SEND name,name,(name,name):options

The SEND command is used to create and send a message to another Mailer
user or users.  It is also the command used to create a message to send to
a user on another computer or at another site (see Section V of this
manual).  If you simply type "send" in response to the Mailer prompt and
press RETURN you will be prompted for everything else.  In this example
Franklin is sending a message to the "Mailer Manager".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> send

 Please enter the destination for the mail:
 To> Mailer Manager

 Please enter the subject for this message:
 Subject> Comment on Mailer 4.03

 Please enter the message below: (.done to finish)
 ] I am very pleased with the new version of
 ] Mailer.  Keep up the good work!!! 
 ]
 ]   Ben Franklin
 ] .done

 Your message has been sent to "Mailer Manager".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">

Let's analyze the above example.  When sending a message, Mailer first
prompts for the destination of the message.  This can be a group, Mailer
name, public notesfile name, list of notefile names separated by commas, 
filename (surrounded by brackets), or username preceeded by an equals (=)
sign.  It can also be any combination of these separated by commas.

Next Mailer prompts for a subject for the message.  A subject can be up to
80 characters.  It is not mandatory to type in a subject.  This is up to you.  
If you do not wish to enter a subject just press RETURN. 

 Mailer then prompts for the body of the message and lets you know if the
person you are sending to has set a limit on the length of message they are
willing to receive (see Section V -- MAIL,MANAGE).  If you do not see a
linelimit specified the message can be as long as you wish.  If you are
sending to a group the minimum linelimit that will reach everyone in the
group will be shown.  If your message exceeds the linelimit of the receiver
you will be notified when Mailer tries to send your message.  Remember
that the header of the message is counted in the linelimit. 

When you have finished entering your message type .done or .d on a line by
itself and press RETURN.  This tells Mailer that you are finished typing in
your message and it is sent off.  If the message is sent successfully you
will receive a message similar to the one above.  If the message is not
received successfully you will also receive a message, usually containing
the reason for the unsuccessful delivery.

If for some reason the message is undeliverable (exceeds linelimit, can't
find Mailer name, etc.), you should be aware that Mailer will temporarily
store this message in a local file named MESSAGE which can be saved
using the NOS system command "SAVE,MESSAGE".  To initiate NOS
commands from Mailer see Section V of this manual.

Sending Mail with Options

It is possible when sending mail to a user or users to specify different
options concerning  the mail.  These options are attached to the name of
the recipient with a ":".  These are the options:

nosubject   prevents Mailer from adding a subject field to the message.  If
it is applied
    to all names in a list it prevents Mailer from prompting for a subject.

userfields   prompts the sender for additional header fields to be added to
the     message after the subject field.

nocc                       prevents the recipient from receiving the "cc" field, but
adds a empty
   "bcc" field to the header that indicates that there were unlisted recip-
   ients of the message.

bcc   supresses this recipient from appearing in the "cc" field, but adds the
   name to the "bcc" field.

For example, suppose Franklin wanted to send a message to S. Morse and
did not want to be prompted for the usual subject field, but wanted to
specify his own user field.  He would have typed

  send S. Morse:nosubject:userfields

He would then have been prompted for the userfields he wanted to add,
before being prompted for the body of the message.

When a message is sent to more than one person each recipient receives a
"cc:" field in their message header containing the names of the other
recipients of the message.  For a long mailing list or if you do not want the
recipients to know who else has received the message you can add the
option "nocc" when sending the message.  This will suppress the printing
of the "cc:" field but will add a blank "bcc:" field to the message.  This
indicates to the recipient that someone else has received this message but
does not name the other recipients.  For example if Franklin wanted to
send a message  to the group "Flying Friends"  but did not want the "cc:"
field to be printed for each recipient he would have typed

  send  flying friends:nocc

at the prompt.

Any recipient who had the "bcc" option appended to their name wil not
appear in the cc: of the other  recipients but they will have a non blank
"bcc" field if any of the other recipients also had the "bcc" option attached
to their name.  For example

  send  (S. Morse, B. Franklin):bcc, Flying Friends

What this example is saying is that the same message is being sent to S.
Morse, B. Franklin and  each member in the group called Flying Friends.
Each of the members of Flying Friends will have a "cc:" field in their
message header that contains the names of the other members of the
group.  They will also have a blank "bcc:" field indicating that someone else
received the message (S. Morse and B. Franklin) but not naming them.  S.
Morse and B. Franklin will have a "cc:" field in their message header that
contains the members of Flying Friends and will also have each others
names in the "bcc:" field of their message.

Notice in the above example the parenthesis around S. Morse and B.
Franklin.  If you wish more than one name to receive the same option
surround those names with parenthesis.
  
Resending A Message 

It is possible to resend the previous message as long as the message is
still in the local file "message".  Simply type

 send name:previous

in response to the Mailer prompt substituting the destination of the
message for name.  "Previous" can be abbreviated to "p" if you wish.  You
will be placed in message entry mode with the previous message as the
body of the message.  You can then edit the message with the following
commands. 

Editing a Message  

The simplest editing technique is used if you notice an error in the line
you are currently typing.  Hold down the CTRL key and h to back up on that
line and retype the rest of the line.  If you wish to do more complicated
editing, Mailer provides you with some editing commands.  When one of
these is used it must be typed on a line by itself and you should press
RETURN after typing it.  The commands can be shortened to their most
unique form.  The commands are:

 .ABORT (.A)

This command is used if you are in the midst of typing a message and then
decide you do not want to send the message.  It aborts the sending of the
message and returns you to the Mailer prompt.
  
 .NEW (.N)  

If you have totally messed up your message and want to start again, this
command will clear the current message and let you start the message
again.

 .EDIT (.E)

This command will put you into the system editor so you can edit your
message.   Normally you will be put into XEDIT but if your terminal is in
screen mode you will be put into the Full Screen Editor.  See the
appropriate manuals for an explanation of these editors (available  in the
UCC Bookstore, A123, LGRES).   It is also possible to choose a different
editor by customizing this command (see Section V).

Any  text  (up  to forty characters) typed on the same line as the .EDIT
command will be passed on to the appropriate editor as an editing
command.

 .READ (.R)

This  command makes it possible to append a file to the note being
written, without entering the  editor.   The filename will be prompted for
if not given with the command.  A search for the file will be done in the
following order:  local file, indirect access permanent file.

        .PROC (.P)

This command allows the user to upload mail created on a micro-computer.  
See Section  V for an example of using this command.  This command can
also be customized to perform other operations (see Section V).

 .LIST (.L)

This command will list out the current message.  If you have edited the
message you may want to look at a fresh copy of the message before
ending the message.

          .INFO (.I)

This command displays the list of names that the message is destined for,
including all the options that will be processed for each name.  It will also
show other  information about the message, such as user-defined header
fields, subject, and linelimit.

 .DONE (.D)

This command tells Mailer you have finished your message and to send it.

 In this example, Franklin is sending a message to S. Morse.  He types part
of the letter, starts over, edits the message, lists it back out and then
decides not to send it.  The example as it would be typed is on the left.  On
the right, when needed, is an explanation of the command.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> send
 Please enter the destination for the mail:
 To> S. Morse
 Please enter the subject for this message:
 Subject> Conflict of Interest
 Please enter the message below: (.done to finish)
 ] Dear Sam:
 ] In reference to your new assignment.  Don't
 ] .new   Decides to start over
 ] Dear Sam:
 ]
 ] Congraduations !!  I  was  very happy  to hear that
 ] your work is finally being  recognized.  Have you
 ] given any thought as to  how this affects your
 ] .edit   Wants to edit what 
 XEDIT  3.1.00    he has typed so far
  ??   c/very happy/pleased/
   Congradulations!! I was pleased to hear that
 ?? quit   Stops editing
 MESSAGE is a local file
 ] .list   Relists the message
 Dear Sam:   to check changes
  
 Congraduations !!  I was  pleased to hear that
 your work is finally being  recognized.  Have you
 given any thought as to  how this affects your
 ] .abort   Decides not to send
 Message sending is  aborted.   the message 

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin">
Sending A Previously Created File As Mail

You  may wish to send a previously created file to someone.  Instead of
reading the file into the message body you can simply use the TRANSMIT
command.


TRANSMIT
   TRANSMIT filename name
   TRANSMIT filename name,(name,name):options

If you specify the TRANSMIT command by itself you will be prompted for
the name of the file you wish to send and the name  or names you wish to
send the file to.  You will also be prompted for a subject.   If you do not
wish to give a subject just press  RETURN.

In this example Franklin is sending a  previously created file called
"history" to S. Morse

   Type ? for help at any prompt!
            "B. Franklin">  transmit 
  Please enter the filename containing the mail:
  File>  history
  Please enter the destination for this file:
  Name> S.  Morse
  Please enter the  subject for this message:
  Subject>  Here's the Update

  Your message has be sent to "S. Morse",

  Type ? for help at any prompt!
  "B. Franklin"> 


You can also transmit  a file to a name or names specifying options.  These
options are identical to the options used with the SEND command.  For a
list of options and their meanings see the section in this manual on the
SEND  command.


Finding A Mailer Name, Alias or Public Notesfile


You may wish to send mail to someone and not know their Mailer name.  If
you have some idea of what their name might be you can search the Mailer
database using the FIND command.  This command can also be useful for
finding out who an alias belongs to, if a linelimit has been set for a Mailer
notesfile or what the names of public notesfiles are.  You should be aware
that this command is searching the whole Mailer database which is very
large.  This could cause Mailer to be slow in responding.

FIND
FIND name,name,name,...

If you specify the FIND command by itself you will be prompted for the
template you wish to search the database for.  A template is either the
name  you wish to search for or a form of the name  with wildcards in
place of the characters in the name that you might be unsure of.   You can
also specify a list of names or templates as long as they are separated by
commas.  There are two wildcards that can be used.

 * -- An asterisk in a name stands for any single character.

 + -- A plus stands for any string of characters.

You may also narrow down the search by specifying the type of name to
search for -- public, private, group,  alias, or mine. This is done by
attaching a colon and the type to the end of the template you are searching
for.

If you specify a specific  Mailer name or user name,  instead of a template
with wild cards, more information will be returned to you.  Among that
information is the state of the "Mail refused flag", the "Forum" flag, and
notification if the residence of the mailfile is not on the default device
for mailfiles.

In this example Franklin can only remember part of the Mailer name for his
friend Morse and is using the FIND command with wildcards to find out
what the full name is.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> find +morse+
  
 Name Type
 -----------------------------------------------
 "S. Morse" [Private]
 "Morse Codes"  [Publlic]
  
The results of the FIND command show there are two Mailer names that
contain the string "Morse" and that one is a private notesfile and the other
public.  Since Franklin knew that he was looking for a private notesfile he
could have restricted the search as follows:

 "B. Franklin"> find +morse+:Private

The following, typed in response to the prompt, will return a list of all
public notesfiles.

 "B. Franklin"> find +:Public

Please note that the notesfile whose Mailer name is "Directory" contains a
list of all public notesfiles that are generally accessible.  Some public
notefiles that would be listed with the above FIND command may have
restrictions on them and may not be accessible to all users.
Setting Alias, Forwarding, Verbosity, or Abbreviation


There are certain options in Mailer that can be changed by the user.  Some
of these are only changed for the current session, others last until you use
the set command again.  The option that is set permanently is
FORWARDING, which is used to have your mail automatically forwarded to
someone else.  The options that are set only for the current session are:
ALIAS, which allows you to use one of the aliases you have created with
the CREATE ALIAS command when sending mail; VERBOSITY, which controls
the kinds of prompts Mailer issues; and ABBREVIATION, which can be used
to set up abbreviations for Mailer names or commands.  If you wish the
temporary options to be set all the time you can put the set command with
these options into a MAILPRO prolog file that is initiated each time you
enter Mailer (see Section IV).  The Mailer SHOW command can be used to
see what the options used by the SET command are currently set to.

SET

If you type the SET command by itself you will be prompted for the option
that you want to set.  The options are: alias, verbosity, forwarding and
abbreviation.  These options can be abbreviated to their shortest unique
form.

SET ALIAS

Using this option allows you to send mail using one of the aliases you have
created with the CREATE ALIAS command.  This alias will only be in effect
for the current session.  If you do not type in the alias you wish to use
with the command you will be prompted for it.  Here, Franklin wishes to
send mail using the alias he created, called  "Weatherman".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> set alias
  
 Please enter the alias you wish to now send mail under:
 Alias> Weatherman

 Now using mailer as "Weatherman".

You may also use SET ALIAS to set your  current name to the name of one
of the public notesfiles that you have created.

Please note  --  SET ALIAS should not be used when sending network mail
unless the alias has been registered with the CREATE  ALIAS command.

SET FORWARDING

The forwarding option can be used to have your private mail automatically
forwarded to another user, more than one user (names separated by
commas), a registered group or anything that is valid for the name option. 
Once forwarding is set your mail will continue to be forwarded until you
clear forwarding by specifying "" ( two adjacent quotes) for the
forwarding address.  In the following example Franklin is going to have all
his mail forwarded to S. Morse.
  
 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Ben Franklin"> set forwarding

 Please enter the forwarding address for this notesfile.
 Forwarding Address> S. Morse

 Forwarding address is set to "S. Morse".

  
Franklin can clear the forwarding address by specifying either his private
notesfile name for the forwarding address or "" (adjacent double quotes). 
In the following example Franklin is clearing his forwarding address.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Ben Franklin"> set forwarding ""

 Forwarding address is cleared.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Ben Franklin">

SET VERBOSITY

Verbosity refers to the type of prompts you receive, error messages and
acknowledgement messages.  If you do not change the verbosity it is set to
full.  Setting the verbosity to other than full only lasts for the current
session unless you have put the command into the MAILPRO prolog file. 
The options for verbosity are:

 silent - issues only error messages and brief prompts
 brief  - error messages, brief prompts and acknowledgements
 full - error messages, full prompts and acknowledgements

In this example Franklin is setting his verbosity to "brief".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Ben Franklin"> set verbosity

 Please enter the verbosity mode:
 Verbosity> brief

 "Ben Franklin">

Notice that with verbosity set to brief you no longer receive the help
message.

There is an even more temporary way to change the verbosity  for a single
command.  This is done by simply prefixing the command with either a "!"
for full verbosity or a "$" for silent verbosity.  This can be especially
useful in MAILPRO when defining abbreviations.

SET ABBREVIATION

This option can be used to set up abbreviations for such things as Mailer
names, commands or sequences of commands.  These abbreviations are only
in effect for the current session.  If you want to set up permanent
abbreviations you should put this command into a MAILPRO prolog file.  In
this example Franklin is setting up the abbreviation CAT for initiating the
NOS command CATLIST from within Mailer.
  
  
 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Ben Franklin"> set abbreviation

 Please enter the abbreviation to be set:
 Abbreviation> cat

 Please enter the definition for the abbreviation:
 Definition> system catlist

 The abbreviation "cat" is set to "system catlist".
 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Ben Franklin"> 

Now when Franklin types "cat" in response to a Mailer prompt he will
receive a listing of his CYBER files and be prompted again.

SHOW
SHOW ALIAS
SHOW ABBREVIATION
SHOW FORWARDING
SHOW VERBOSITY

If you type the SHOW command by itself you will be prompted for the
option you want information on.  The options are the same as for the SET
command -- alias, abbreviation, forwarding, and verbosity.  These can be
abbreviated to their shortest unique form.  In this example Franklin is
checking to see what he has set for abbreviations.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Ben Franklin"> show abbreviation

 The abbreviation "CAT" is set to "SYSTEM CATLIST".

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "Ben Franklin">

This shows that Franklin had previously set up an abbreviation for the
command "system catlist" and called it "cat". 

IV.  Examples of Files that Mailer Uses


An ASCII file is a file that can contain both upper and lower case text.  It
is important that you create some of the following files in ASCII mode.   A
file  that must be created in NORMAL mode contains only upper case text.
These examples also assume that you are using XEDIT to create the files. 
You can use any system editor.

Creating an ASCII file for a Group

The first line in the file must contain the upper case record name of the
group.  If the file is to contain more than one group this line would be the
record name of the first group.  Subsequent lines contain all the Mailer
names in that group separated by commas.  Each Mailer name can be on a
separate line.  Just remember to put a comma after each one except the
last.

If there is more than one group in the file an EOR (End-of-Record) must
separate one group from the next.   To  enter an EOR use the WEOR command
in XEDIT after typing in the next record name.   To enter an EOR using FSE
put in a line containing (EOR).

In this example the file mgroups is created containing a group whose
record name is flying.
  
 batch
 /ascii
 xedit,mgroups
  empty file/creation mode assumed.
 ??
   INPUT
 ? FLYING
 ? S.  Morse,T. Smith,
 ? R. Jones
 ?
  EDIT
 ?? e,,rl
 MGROUPS REPLACED.
 MGROUPS IS A LOCAL FILE.

This group can then be registered with a group name using the CREATE
GROUP command where "mgroup" is specified as the filename and "flying"
as the record name.

Suppose you want to add another group to "mgroups" under the record name
"staff".

 batch
 /ascii
 /get,mgroups
 /xedit,mgoups
 ?? b
 R. Jones
 ??
  INPUT
 ? STAFF
 ?
  EDIT
 ?? weor
 ??
  INPUT
 ? P. Driscoll,K. Jordan,E. Campbell
 ?
  EDIT
 ?? e,,rl
 MGROUPS REPLACED.
 MGROUPS IS A LOCAL FILE.
The file "mgroups" now contains two groups, flying and staff.  The second
group would also have to be registered with a name using the CREATE
GROUP command.  It would use the same filename "mgroups" but the record
name would be "staff".

Creating a Login Procedure

A login procedure is a procedure that is executed automatically each time
you sign on to the CYBER.  It can be used to do such things as turn the
SILENCE command on so that you do not receive notification of mail or to
get a count of your mail automatically without having to get into Mailer.

The following shows the creation of a login procedure that turns the
silence command on but does not give a  confirmation message and then
uses the MAILER command to access Mailer to display information about
your new mail.  For an explanation of the MAILER command see Section V of
this manual.  This file should be created using NORMAL (upper-case only)
mode.

 batch
 /XEDIT,MYLOGIN
 EMPTY FILE/CREATION MODE ASSUMED.
 ??
  INPUT
 ? .PROC,LOGIN.
 ? .IF, OT  .EQ.  IAO, TERMINAL.
 ?  $SILENCE,ON,QUIET.
 ?  $MAILER/P-,I-,V-. LIST NEW
 ? .ENDIF,TERMINAL.
 ? $REVERT,NOLIST.
 ?
  EDIT
 ?? e,,rl
 MYLOGIN REPLACED.
 MYLOGIN IS A LOCAL FILE.
 /uproc,mylogin

The UPROC,MYLOGIN command tells the system to use the file "mylogin" as
the login procedure. 

Creating a Mail Prolog

If there are certain commands you want Mailer to execute for you
automatically each time you call it, create an ASCII text file with the
commands in it and store it under the name MAILPRO.  Each time you start
up Mailer, it looks for this file.  If it finds MAILPRO, Mailer performs the
commands in the file.  For example, if you want Mailer to automatically do
an UPDATE of new messages each time you call it, put the UPDATE
command in a MAILPRO file.  Any Mailer command which you can type on
your keyboard can be placed in MAILPRO.

Here is an example of the creation of a MAILPRO file that automatically
does an update of new messages each time you use Mailer.

 batch
 /ascii
 /xedit,mailpro
 empty file/creation mode assumed.
 ??
  INPUT
 ? update
 ?
  EDIT
 ?? e,,rl
 MAILPRO REPLACED.
 MAILPRO IS A LOCAL FILE.

It is important to know that Mailer first looks for a local file named
MAILPRO.  If there is no local file named MAILPRO, Mailer looks for a file
by that name in your permanent file catalog.

Also, when Mailer executes MAILPRO it only executes commands up to the
first EOR.  This means that MAILPRO can contain groups.  If you do use
MAILPRO to store your groups be careful that the first line of the file does
not conflict with any of the record names.

Here is an example creating a MAILPRO that executes a LIST NEW and
contains a group whose record name is GRP1.

 batch
 /ascii
 /xedit,mailpro
  empty file/creation mode assumed.
 ??
  INPUT
 ? .This is my Mailpro
 ? list new
 ?GRP1
 ?
  EDIT
 ?? weor
 ??
  INPUT
 ? S. Morse,B. Franklin
 ?
  EDIT
 ?? e,,rl
 MAILPRO REPLACED.
 MAILPRO  IS  A LOCAL FILE.

Creating a Command File

A command file is similar to a Mail prolog.  It is an ASCII file that
contains Mailer commands that you want executed.   The difference is that 
a command file is not executed automatically when you enter Mailer 
(unless of course you have put the name of your command file surrounded
by brackets in your  Mail prolog).  It is executed anytime you type the name
of the file surrounded by brackets at the Mailer prompt.  You can have as
many command files as you want  and they do not have to have any special
names.

Here is an example of a command file that that B. Franklin uses to read any
new mail in the  public file  called "Morse Codes" and then return to his
own private mail file.  He has called the command file "rcodes".

 batch
 /ascii
 xedit,rcodes
 empty file/creation mode assumed.
 ??
 INPUT
 ?. This file reads  new messages in the file  Morse Codes.
 ? read Morse Codes
 ? new
 ? read  B. Franklin
 ?
 EDIT
 ?? e,,rl
 RCODES REPLACED.
 RCODES I S  A  LOCAL FILE.

This file can now be executed anytime from within Mailer simply  by
typing

 [rcodes]

Notice the first line in the command file.  This is a comment line and is
not executed.   You can put a comment line anywhere you want in your file.  
A comment line must start with a period.

V. Advanced Features


Entering Mailer and Setting Special Switches -- MAILER/P,V,I,C

There is a way to access Mailer, set certain switches, perform Mailer
commands and leave Mailer all on one line. You must be in the BATCH
subsystem to use this command. With each of the switches you specify a
plus ("+") or a minus ("-") to show which way you want the switch to work.
The switches are

 P+  Executes your MAILPRO file.  (default)
 P-  Does not execute your MAILPRO file.
  
 V+  Full verbosity for prompts.  (default)
  V=     Brief verbosity for prompts.
 V-  Silent verbosity for prompts.

 I+  Enter Mailer interactively.  (default)
 I-  Assumes you are going to enter Mailer commands only on this line. 

  C       Puts a comment in the dayfile giving the full Mailer version number.

If you do not specify a switch a plus ("+") is assumed for that switch.

You may wish to issue additional Mailer commands on the same line in
which you set special switches.  To do so, type a period (".") after the
switches are set, then type any Mailer commands (separated by ";") that
you wish performed.

For example:

 MAILER/P-,V-,I-.LIST NEW;QUIT

will not execute your MAILPRO file, will set verbosity to silent, and will
display information on any new mail you have received. Then Mailer will
exit.

This command can be put into a login procedure to be executed each time
you sign on to the CYBER. 

Managing a Notesfile -- MAIL,MANAGE

Issuing the command MAIL,MANAGE activates an interactive notesfile
managing facility. You must have given the proper screen command for your
terminal to have this procedure work properly. For example, if you are
working on a VT100 terminal you must give the

 screen,vt100

command before typing  

 mail,manage

This facility allows you to update parameters of your private notesfile
including setting a linelimit for your notesfile and setting a forwarding
address. You can also update parameters of a public notesfile or group that
you have previously created. Help is available at all levels. This procedure
uses the FSE function keys that correspond to your terminal type. See "NOS
Full Screen Editor User's Guide" for information about function keys used
on various terminals.  This manual is available at the UCC  Bookstore (Rm.
A123,  LGRES).
Initiating NOS System Commands From Within Mailer 

If you are a beginning CYBER user and are only concerned with Mailer you
do not need to worry about this command. NOS is the operating system that
runs on the CYBER. For those users who need to, it is possible to initiate
NOS commands without leaving Mailer by using the Mailer "system"
command. Simply type

 system noscom

substituting the NOS command you want for "noscom", and press RETURN.
This can be especially helpful if you want to change permissions on a
notesfile, or get a listing of your CYBER files without leaving Mailer.
Remember though that if you were not in ASCII before entering Mailer any
of the NOS commands you issue will assume you are in NORMAL.

For example, suppose Franklin wanted to see a list of his permanent files.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> system catlist

Or, in this example Franklin wants to permit S. Morse to send to the group
"Flying Friends" that was stored in the file "mgroups". S. Morse's username
on the CYBER is ABBR793. Franklin must permit the file "mgroups" to
username ABBR793 in read mode.

 Type ? for help at any prompt!
 "B. Franklin"> system permit,mgroups,abbr793=r

Uploading Messages Created on a Micro into  Mailer

It is possible to  create messages you wish to send on your micro and then
upload the file containing the message into Mailer.  This is done using
.PROC.  The file containing the message must be a previously created file.

After you have created the file on your micro get into Mailer on the CYBER.
Follow the directions for sending a message with the SEND command.
When you  are prompted for the body of the message type

 .proc  name

substitute the name of the transfer package you are using, either AUNT,
KERMIT, or XMODEM  for  "name" and press RETURN. 

The transfer package you have specified will be started up.  Exit back to
your micro and transfer the file.  With AUNT and KERMIT you must specify
NOTE as the remote file name.  The PC file is then copied to NOTE, which is
then appended to MESSAGE.  Once the transfer is finished you will be back
in the message collection mode of Mailer and can use any of the other
editing commands to edit, list or exit message mode.

Customizing the Mailer  .PROC  Command

If you wish to customize the .PROC  command so that it performs special
processing other   than its default purpose  (Uploading mail created on a
micro into  Mailer  via AUNT, KERMIT, or XMODEM)  you must create a
MAILPRC  procedure that Mailer can use when you issue the .PROC
command.  It must be a local file or a file in your global library set.
Remember that this procedure must be created and edited in NORMAL
(upper-case only) mode.  

Here is what the standard MAILPRC procedure looks like:

 .PROC,MAILPRC*I,FN.OPTS.
 .HELP
  THIS PROCEDURE CALLS ONE OF THE HOST PROGRAMS
  FOR  UPLOADING FILES FROM MICROS.
 .ENDHELP
 .IF,$OPTS$.EQ.$$.OR.$OPTS$.EQ.$HELP$,HELP.
  $NOTE./ THE FOLLOWING PROGRAMS ARE ALLOWED:
  $NOTE.//  AUNT, KERMIT, XMODEM./
 .ENDIF(HELP)
 .IF,$OPTS$.EQ.$AUNT$,AUNT.
  $AUNT.
  $GET,NOTE.
  $PURGE,NOTE.
  $SKIPEI,FN.
  $COPY,NOTE,FN.
 .ENDIF(AUNT)
 .IF,$OPTS$.EQ.$KERMIT$,KERMIT.
  $KERMIT.
  $FCOPY,P=NOTE,PC=ASCII8,NC=ASCII,R.
  $SKIPEI,FN.
  $COPY,NEW,FN.
  $RETURN,NEW.
 .ENDIF(KERMIT)
 .IF,$OPTS$.EQ.$XMODEM$,XMODEM.
  $RETURN,NOTE.
  $XMODEM,NOTE,R,A,CF=ZZZXMD.
  $SKIPEI,FN.
  $REWIND,NOTE.
  $COPY,NOTE,FN.
 .ENDIF(XMODEM)
 $REVERT,EX.$MAILER.
 $EXIT.
 $REVERT,EX.$MAILER.
 .DATA,ZZZXMD
 EC=CHECKSM
 FM=MSDOS
 EP=Y
 OC=Y
 PG=N

           FN -  the message file to append to (MESSAGE)
                            OPTS  - the name of the package you wish to use

Customizing the Mailer Print Command

If you wish to customize the Mailer print command for your individual use
you must create a MAILPRT procedure that Mailer can use when you issue
the PRINT command. It must be a local file or a file in your global library
set. Remember that this procedure must be created and edited in NORMAL
(upper-case only) mode.  

Here is what the standard MAILPRT procedure looks like:

  .PROC,MAILPRT*I,FN,PR=(*F,*N=ASCII).OPTS.
           $PRINT,FN,PR,SHIFT_OPTS.
       $REVERT,EX.$MAILER
        $EXIT.
   $REVERT,EX.$MAILER
  
  FN - File created by Mailer
  PR  - Printer name
  OPTS - Option string supplied by user


Customizing the Mailer .EDIT command

It is possible to customize the Mailer .EDIT command to call a different
editor other than XEDIT or FSE. To do this you must have a procedure called
MAILEDT that is either a local file or in your global library set. Remember
to create and edit   in NORMAL (upper-case only) mode.

Here is an example of what the standard MAILEDT procedure looks like:

  .PROC,MAILEDT*I,FN=(*F).OPTS.
  $PACK,FN.
   .IF,SL.EQ.1, THEN.
  $FSE,FN,A,WF=ZZZMEDT.OPTS
  $RETURN,ZZZMEDT.
            .ELSE, THEN.
  $XEDIT,FN,AS.OPTS
            .ENDIF,THEN.
 $REVERT,EX.$MAILER.
 $EXIT.
 $REVERT,EX.$MAILER
  
  FN - File to be edited (MESSAGE) 


Changing the Permissions on a Notesfile

When Mailer creates either a private or public notesfile certain
permissions are automatically assigned to the file. Both files are PUBLIC
files which means that all users can get to the files, but only according to
the modes that are set for each.

Your private notesfile is a PUBLIC file in APPEND mode. This means that
anyone can send mail to you, but they cannot read or delete your mail. A
public notesfile is a PUBLIC file in MODIFY mode; anyone can send to or
read the notesfile but only the person creating it can delete from the file.

There may be instances where you might wish to alter these permissions.
If it is your private notesfile or a public notesfile that you created, you
are allowed to do this. There are three categories that files can fall into.
They are PUBLIC (PU), SEMI-PRIVATE (S), and PRIVATE (P).

PU  Available to all users according to the mode set.

S  Available to any user according to the mode set, unless the user has
been denied permission with the NOS PERMIT command.

P Only the owner of the file can access it unless permission has been
granted on an individual basis using the NOS PERMIT command.

These modes apply for each of the above categories:

R  Other users can only read the file. 

M  Other users can read and send to the file. 

A  Other users can only send to the file.  

W  Other users can send, read and delete.  

NULL  Other users are not allowed to use the file.

When a file is PUBLIC the same permissions apply to everyone.
SEMI-PRIVATE gives you more control over the file. You can permit the file
to different users in different modes and you can stop certain people from
using the file. PRIVATE allows you the most control over the file because
no one can use the file unless you have permitted the file to them.

To actually change the permissions on the notesfile you use the NOS
CHANGE and PERMIT commands. The form for the CHANGE command is:

 change,filename/ct=x,m=y

where you substitute the actual name of the file the notesfile is stored in
for "filename", the category you want for "x", and the actual mode for "y".

If you have made the file SEMI-PRIVATE and wish to permit it to a user in
a different mode or stop someone from using it, you would then use the
PERMIT command to permit it in that mode to the individual user. This
would also be the case if you had made the file PRIVATE and wish to
permit it to another user. The form for the PERMIT command is:

 permit,filename,username=mode

where you substitute the name of the file the notesfile is stored in for
"filename", the CYBER username of the user you are permitting the file to
for "username" and the mode that you want the user to use the file in for
"mode".  For more information on the NOS CHANGE and PERMIT commands
see NOS Volume 3 -- System Commands, Chapter 10.
Sending Mail to Someone on a Different Computer or at Another Site


What are Network Mail Services?

A  single computer's mail system allows its users to exchange messages
electronically. A network mail system allows the users  on independent
computers connected to the same network to  exchange electronic mail.
Going one step farther, if networks at different Universities have a
common link, users on these networks can exchange information.

The network here at the  University of Massachusetts  is called UMNet. 
Currently, several mail systems are linked by UMNet. These are CYBER
Mailer,  Eagle Mailer,  RCF mail,     and BITNET.

Through UMNet users can access BITNET,   an electronic  mail network
which interconnects  hundreds of universities and research institutions
worldwide.  BITNET is connected to other, independent networks  such as
ARPANET, CSNET, MAILNET,  JANET,  and UUCP.  Consequently, users with
access to BITNET may exchange electronic mail with colleaagues all  over
the world.

How the Network Mail System Works

The network mail system can be compared to a postal system. Each
computer system acts as a branch post office. When you send mail to
someone on a different computer, the file you send as mail is put into a
queue on your computer, the branch post office. If your computer is
directly connected to the mail recipient's computer then the mail is
directly transferred to that computer. If not, it is first sent to a branch
that is directly connected to both computers and from that branch on to
the recipient's computer.    Because this process is  automatic, it iis not
necessary for you to be aware of it.

There is one thing you must know in  order to send mial to a user on a
different computer:  the user's network address.  A network address
consists of two basic parts: a recipient's name and a destination host
identifier.  These parts are separated by an '@'.  For example, the basic
formula for a network address is:

                  Someone@Somewhere

Sometimes  real network addresses can be just this simple.  Other times,
they can be more complicated.  For example:

     "DRA1::Jones%VAX3.SomeU"@CSNet-Relay.ARPA

But even in this more complicated case, the basic formula  remains valid. 
The '@' still separates the recipient's rather complicated name for his/her
rather complicated destination host identifier.

Generally, the construction of the destination host identifier follows a
convention.  In its most complicated form, the destination host identifier
appears as a string of names which are separated from each other by
periods.  These are usually arranged (JANet identifiers are an exception)
as an address which becomes progressively more specific as you read the
string from right to left.  An example of a network address  which
contains such a destination host  identifier might be:

    Someuser@UMass.Amherst.MA.USA

The network communication software "looks" at the destination host
identifier.  It delivers your mail message to that address.  It is the
responsibility of the recipient's computer system to make sense out of the
part of the network address which occurs to the left of the '@'.
Sending Network Mail from Mailer

When MAILER asks you to whom you want to send mail, you may specify a
full network address. A full network address consists of the name which
identifies the mail recipient, followed by the character "@", followed by a
destination host  identifier.  For example, to send mail to a EAGLE  user
named Jones, you would enter the following Mailer command:

 send jones@eagle

Dissecting this string, "jones" is clearly the name of the recipient of the
message, the "@" indicates to Mailer that this message is destined for a
foreign mail system,   and "eagle" is the name of the  host on  which 
Jones'  mailbox resides.

To send mail to a VAX user named Johnson, you would enter:

           send johnson@cs

Where "johnson" is the name of the recipient of the message, and "cs" is
the name of the Computer Science Department VAX network.

You can send mail to any  user of a  VAX  which is connected to the
Computer Science Department VAX network (not only VAXen in the
Computer Science Department).  As always, you need to know the
recipients mail name and also the DECNet node name of the VAX on which  
the recipient's  mailbox  resides.  For example:

           thomas%hamp@cs

would be the network address of a user named Thomas at Hampshire
College, where "hamp" is the DECNet node name of the VAX at Hampshire
College.

Sending Network Mail From The Eagle

You  may specify full network addresses from the EAGLE mail system, as
with  MAILER.  For example, to send a message from the  EAGLE to a CYBER
Mailer user named Jones, you would enter the following when the EAGLE
mail system asks to whom you want your message delivered:

 jones@mars

In  this example, "jones" is the name of the recipient, and   "mars" is the
host identifier of the Cyber 175.  To send a message to a  Mailer user who
resides on the Cyber 830, you would enter a full network address like:

 jones@pluto

Similarly, if you wish to send mail to someone on the Computer Science
Department VAX network whose name is Johnson, the full network address
would be:

 johnson@cs

Where "johnson" is the name of the recipient of the message, and "cs" is
the name of the VAX network.

Sending Network Mail From The Computer Science Department VAX
Network

When sending mail from the Computer Science Department VAX network,
the full network address must be quoted and also be preceded by  UMNET%.
For example, if you are sending to a user named Jones whose mailbox 
resides on the Cyber 175, you would address your  mail to:

 umnet%"jones@mars.ucc"

Here, "mars"  is the destination host identifier of the Cyber 175, and "ucc"
names the domain (or department) within which "mars" resides.  In case
the Computer Science Department  VAX network contains a node named
"mars", the "ucc" differentiates that local node from the one  with the
same name at the University Computing Center.

If you  wish  to send mail from the VAX to an EAGLE user named Johnson
the address would be:

 umnet%"johnson@eagle.ucc"

Again, the "ucc" resolves a potential conflict between a Computer Science
node named "eagle",  and one with the same name at the UCC.
  
Undeliverable  or   Unreadable   Mail 

If you are expecting to receive network mail, you must allow UN=SYSTEMX
permission to the receiving mail file.  At this time   this is the default.

If you send a message through the network and, for some reason, the
network is unable to deliver the message, it attempts to return the
message to you along with the reason for its return. If your message is so
botched up that the network can not return it to you, it logs this event in a
system  file.   No message is discarded without a trace.

If you  receive mail through  BITNET and  it appears to be giberish, find out
the format that the  mail was sent in.  We are unable  to read NETDATA and
DMS DISK DUMP formats (sent by some IBM sites).  You should inform the
person sending you mail that the only format we can read is CLASS M
PUNCH.

How to Get Help from the Network Mail System

To obtain information about network related topics, send a mail message
to:

 help@system

If you want to obtain a list of topics that you can get help on send a
message containing the word INTRO as the body of the message.  A short
introduction on the mail system along with a list of available topics will
be returned to you as a mail file. You can then send a message to
help@system requesting information on individual topics. The body of the
message should contain a list of the topics you wish help on.

Sending Mail through BITNET

A mail directory database  exists that allows users to register by
electronic mail to access BITNET. Your first step in sending mail through
BITNET is to register with this database. After successfully registering
with the database you can then send and receive BITNET mail.

There are two different methods   which  can be  employed to register 
with  BITNET. The simplest method  involves using the BITNET command.
There is a restriction on this command. You must be using a terminal that
has been defined to run the Full Screen Editor or a PC that can emulate one
of these terminals. If you have the correct type terminal, you simply enter
the proper screen command for your terminal then type

 BITNET

and press RETURN. For example, if you are using a VT100 terminal, you can
enter the following two commands to invoke the BITNET utility:

 SCREEN,VT100
 BITNET

This activates a menu driven facility with options for registering with the
BITNET database, sending a previously created file as mail, modifying or
deleting your entry in the database, obtaining network related information,
and entering MAILER. Just choose the option you wish and answer the
questions presented to you for that option.  Remember  that the first thing
you must do is  register with the database.

As you answer each question press RETURN and the cursor will move to the
next answer space. When you have finished answering the questions press
F6 to quit. The key on your keyboard that corresponds to F6 varies
depending on your terminal type.  Refer to "NOS Full Screen Editor User's
Guide" or "Using FSE  at UMASS"  for a listing of the keys for each terminal.
  

The second method  for registering with the database  will work on any
terminal from within any mail system which is part of UMNet. To add
yourself to the BITNET database using this method, you must send a
message from your mail system to 

 Registrar@System 

The body of the message you send to registrar should contain the following
Registrar command
  
 Add name=x path="fnp" pw=y comment="dc"

where

x  is the name you wish users of BITNET to know you by. It can be up to 7
characters and must be unique in the database. This is the name which
users at other BITNET sites will use to address mail to you.

fnp  is your  local  network  address  (remember -- your name on your  mail
system, an '@',   and the  destination  host identifier of the host on which
your mailbox resides). This must be enclosed in double quotes. For
example, 

  "J. Smith@Mars.UCC"
  "Jackson@CS"
  "Davis%Smith@CS"

y  is a password that you will need to remember later if you wish to
change or delete your entry in the database. It can be up to 10 characters.

dc  is a descriptive comment. It can be up to 60 characters long. It usually
contains your full name and a local phone number or department name.

For example, you wish to be known as Ming to BITNET users; you use
MAILER on the UCC node  named Mars (Cyber 175)  and your name on MAILER
is J. Smith, so your  local network address here at UMASS is J.
Smith@Mars.UCC;  you have chosen Gordon as your password and you wish
to have your name and phone in the comment field.  To add yourself to the
BITNET database you would send the following message to
registrar@system:

 Add name= Ming path="J. Smith@ Mars.UCC" pw=Gordon -
  comment="Judy Smith 413-545-2690"

Registrar commands must be contained entirely on a single line unless a
dash occurs at the end of a line. A dash at the end of a line indicates that
the command is continued on the next line.

The registrar will respond to you by electronic mail. You will receive a
reassuring response if you have been successfully added to the database. If
you have not been added (possibly the name you chose is not unique) you
will receive an error message which describes why your request was
rejected.

Once you have been successfully added to the database you can send mail
through BITNET by addressing the mail to:

 name@node.BITNET

where

 name is the mail recipient's name on BITNET

 node is the name of the node the recipient resides on

For example, to send a letter to a user known on BITNET as Riley and whose
nodename is TUCC (Triangle Universities Computation Center in North
Carolina) you would type

 Riley@TUCC.BITNET

It is also possible to change or delete your entry in the database. Suppose
you are the user  Ming that was added above. You have decided to delete
yourself from the database. The delete command is similar to the add
command. Again, you would send a message to

 Registrar@System

and the body of the message would read 

 Delete name=Ming path="J. Smith@Mars.UCC" pw=Gordon

All the parameters must be present and identical to the ones you used
when you added yourself to the database.

To change your name, path, password, or comment, the general form of the
command is

 Change name=x path="fpn" pw=y -
  newname=newx newpath="newfpn" newpw=newy newcomment="dc"

The information provided in the first line must be identical to the
information you provided when you added yourself. You need only include
the parts of the second line that are changing from the first line. For
example, say the user  Ming,  who was added above, wishes to change her
password to Flash. She would send a message to Registrar@System that
reads

 Change name=Ming path="J. Smith@ Mars.UCC" pw=Gordon -
  newpw=Flash

You may also interrogate the database using the List command. The general
form of the List command is:  

 List name=x path="fpn"

The 'name' and 'path' parameters are both optional. You may supply both,
either, or neither. For example, to obtain a listing of the database entry
whose name component is  Ming, you would send a message to the
Registrar looking like:

 List name=Ming

To obtain a listing of the database entry whose path component is "J.
Smith@Mars.UCC" you would send:

 List path="J. Smith@Mars.UCC" 

The List command also allows wild carding. A plus sign (+) in a name or
path parameter matches any sequence of characters. An asterisk (*)
matches any single character. For example:

 List path="+Smith+"

will return a listing of all database entries whose path components
contain the string 'Smith'.

 List path="+@Mars.UCC***"

will return all database entries whose path components end in the string
'@Mars.UCC' followed by any three characters.

Sending Mail Through ARPANET, CSNET,  MAILNET, JANET, AND UUCP 

Once you have registered to access BITNET you may also send mail through
the ARPANET, CSNET, MAILNET,  JANET and UUCP networks. All you need to
know is the name and   destination host identifier of the person to whom
you are sending mail.

The general form of an address on ARPANET, CSNET, MAILNET,  JANET or
UUCP is:

 name@node.ARPA
or
 name@node.CSNET
or
 name@node.MAILNET
or
 name%janetpath@AC.UK
or
  node2!node3!...!nodei!name@node1.UUCP

The following  domains of ARPANet are also recognized, so you can send
mail  to them:

 COM, EDU, GOV,  MIL and NET

For example, an ARPANet user named Jake whose mailbox is located on the
Wiscvm host of the University  of Wisconsin within the EDU domain of
ARPANet  can be addressed by:

 Jake@Wiscvm.Wisc.EDU

Anyone on ARPANET or CSNET wishing to send you mail would send it to  

 name%UMass.BITNET@Wiscvm.Wisc.EDU

where "name"  is the name you used when you registered with BITNET.  The
Wiscvm host  of the University of Wisconsin has access to both ARPANet
and BITNET, so it acts as a gateway between the two networks.

Receiving Mail from Another BITNET User

It is very simple for someone at a different site to send you mail once you
have registered with BITNET. All they need to know is your BITNET name
and the BITNET node name for the University of Massachusetts  which  is 
"umass".  They would send the mail to:

 Yourname@UMass

substituting your real BITNET name for "Yourname".

 Hints and Short Cuts

If you know that someone at UMASS is registered with BITNET but you do
not know what mail system they are using at UMASS you can still get mial
to them as long as you know their name on  BITNET.  For example, you wish
to send mail to Jones.  You know he is registered as Jones with  BITNET,
but you are not sure what mail system he is using here at UMASS.  Simply
send the mail to

 Jones@UMass

BITNET will route the  mail to the mail system that Jones resides on.

 If you are sending mail through BITNET you can leave off the .BITNET, and
the message will still be sent, as long as the nodename you specify is a
valid BITNET node. For example, you wish to send mail to Riley at TUCC.
Instead of typing

 Riley@TUCC.BITNET

just type

 Riley@TUCC

The system will check to see if TUCC is   the name of a node in the local
mail network (UMass and Five Colleges).     If it is not,  the message is  
passed on  to BITNET. If BITNET recognizes the node, then it sends the
message on. If it does not recognize it, an error message is returned to
you.

VI.  ERROR MESSAGES

The first set of error messages listed here are not the only error
messages you can get in Mailer, but are the ones that are not
self-explanatory.  These error messages also do not  cause Mailer to abort. 

Unneeded input "xxx" discarded.

You supplied an extra parameter(s) that Mailer didn't need for a command .  

Typeahead "xxx" discarded.

If you have strung a number of commands together on a line and Mailer
detects an error, anything on the line after the error is discarded.

Mail was refused because your private notesfile was full.
Please delete unnecessary messages and/or files if you wish to receive
mail in the future.

If you receive this message then some incoming mail has definitely been
refused.  You should check the limits on your account.  You have either
exceeded the size allowed for one file or you have exceeded your total file
space.  You will not be able to receive any mail until you have freed up
some space.  Delete any uneeded mail in your notesfile or any unnecessary
files on your account.

Due to a missing permanent file or lack of permission, ... 

You may not have the proper permissions to read or send to the notesfile
you are trying to access.  Or, that notesfile may have been purged.

Due to the number of queued files or jobs, ...

If you have too much in the system queues you can't send network mail.
Each network name that you send to will require one queue entry for
several minutes.

Due to the absence of a permanent file device, ...

The permanent file device required is not available.  This message will
occur if a user on the CYBER 730 sends to a notesfile which resides on a 
removable or auxillary pack.  It may also occur if there is a system
problem.

Due to the notesfile's established linelimit of nnn, ...

A linelimit of nnn has been established by the owner of the notesfile that
you are trying to send to and you have exceeded that line limit.  The header
lines (about 6) are also counted towards this limit.

Due to an unexpected system error, ...

This message usually means that something is wrong with the system or
with Mailer itself.  Try again later.  If the error persists then contact the
Mailer Manager, whose Mailer name is "Mailer Manager".

When  an operation within Mailer encounters some limit of the users
account it will try to recover if it can.  However some errors are
sufficiently   serious that an abort of Mailer is the only solution.

An  abort will prevent Mailer from updating any UPDATE information that
changed during the current session, this means that mail you have read
may be marked as NEW when you re-enter  Mailer.

When Mailer aborts it will issue two messages to the dayfile:

 FATAL  MAILER ERROR OCCURED.
 ERROR CODE WAS   n.

Generally  the system will issue some message prior to these that
indicates the problem encountered.  The actual number in the "ERROR CODE
..." message is not very useful, it is the REPRIEVE error number which
corresponds to the system error that caused the abort.  The only solution
to most of these problems is to increase the account's limits.

Here   is a list  of some common messages  issued by the system and their
causes:

FL REQUEST BEYOND MFL (CM).

This message means that Mailer needed more memory than was allowed by
the users account.  Generally this occurs when Mailer is processing a large
list of names, as in a mailing list.  It can also be caused by reading a
notesfile with a lot of messages, or messages with many  fields in their
headers.  It may also be caused by a loop.

PRU LIMIT...

Any message refering to "PRU LIMIT" means that the size of local files
exceeds that allowed for the account.  This can happen even if the local
files seem small because the system typically allocates local files in
increments of several hundred PRUs.  Mailer creates local files when
processing groups, aliases, forwarding addresses, and of course when
processing files; avoiding the use of these may prevent the error.

LOCAL FILE LIMIT.

This message means that Mailer tried to create more local files than were
allowed.  This usually means that some kind of loop occured.  The most
likely cause is a forwarding address that evaluates to itself.


